Chances of Brexit deal hang on Boris Johnson and Ursula von der Leyen dinner
News that PM will meet European commission president comes as Michel Barnier says chance of deal is ‘very slim’

Boris Johnson and Ursula von der Leyen, pictured in January. The pair will have dinner in Brussels on Wednesday evening. 


The future of Britain’s relationship with the rest of Europe will hang on the success of a dinner between Boris Johnson and Ursula von der Leyen in Brussels on Wednesday, it has emerged, as the EU’s chief negotiator warned the chance of a Brexit deal was now “very slim”.

Downing Street said the prime minister would join the European commission president at its Berlaymont headquarters on Wednesday evening, where the leaders would seek to break the Brexit impasse over a three-course meal.

Johnson will take prime minister’s questions in the House of Commons before flying from RAF Northolt to Brussels to dine with Von der Leyen, armed with a memo from his chief negotiator, David Frost, on the remaining obstacles to a historic trade and security deal with the EU. He will return to Downing Street after the discussions.


Not a meal deal but a menu for the Brexit trade talks – imagined!
Read more
Von der Leyen tweeted on Tuesday: “I look forward to welcoming UK prime minister Boris Johnson tomorrow evening. We will continue our discussion on the partnership agreement.”

No 10 sources pushed back on rumours that Johnson had wanted to delay the meeting to allow the 27 EU heads of state and government to intervene in the discussions when they gather at the European council summit in the Belgian capital on Thursday. They insisted the prime minister “categorically wants to avoid” such a scenario.

A deal is not expected to be sealed at the dinner but Downing Street said if there was progress and goodwill, the troubled negotiations could be expected to resume on Friday after the council summit.

EU leaders will be informed of any progress when they meet, or could trigger the bloc’s no-deal contingency measures – keeping planes in the sky and borders safe – if the dinner ends in failure.

“It will continue past [Wednesday] if they can make some headway and it’s worth it,” one senior UK official said. Downing Street said it was open to continuing talks into the weekend and beyond, but stressed nothing could go on past 1 January.

“We have been clear that the future relationship needs to be concluded by the end of the year and negotiations won’t continue in the new year,” a No 10 spokesman said. “That’s been our position throughout.”

Speaking in private to EU ministers on Tuesday, the bloc’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, who has so far resisted calls from some member states to trigger the commission’s no-deal contingency plans, admitted that such measures could soon be necessary given the small chances of success.

“We are close to the moment of needing urgent measures which means a contingency plan for no deal,” Barnier said, according to EU sources. “The basis of our future cooperation with the UK is more important than rushing now. We cannot sacrifice our long-term interests for short-term political goals.

